CHATHAM — Three articles were dispatched in record time at the Special Town Meeting on Sunday. It took all of 19 minutes for voters to approve three articles.

All the articles had the support of the Select Board and the Finance Committee. All of the votes were unanimous.

The biggest ticket item was $4.5 million for the construction and completion of Wells 10 and 11. Work was halted on the wells in 2010 when minor levels of the chemical additive MBTE were found in water samples.

Natural groundwater movement has since carried the MBTE out of the zone of contribution for the wells, according to Natural Resources Director Robert Duncanson.

Finance Committee Chair Stephen Daniel said the town needed to invest in water infrastructure.

Water treatment facility to deal with iron, manganese and PFAS

Chatham voters also said yes to $1.4 million for the engineering and design of new water treatment facility to deal with iron, manganese and PFAS for Wells 5 and 8. PFAS are known as “forever chemicals” because they do not biodegrade. PFAS levels were found to be above the state's acceptable limits when testing was done in April and September.

Ann Dixon of West Chatham, who said she was in support of the article, asked if the town was considering any PFAS preventive measures.

“An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure,” she said.

Duncanson said it was premature to identify any single source of contamination currently, but that “every septic system in the community is a problem.”

Keating:Air Force agrees to pay for PFAS cleanups in Mashpee and Falmouth wells

The town is reviewing proposals from several companies to look at potential sources of PFAS to see if any one source in particular stands out, he said. He named several items that include PFAS, including microwave popcorn containers, pizza boxes, fertilizer and items with non-stick coatings.

The treatment facility will have granular activated carbon (GAC) filters that will remove the iron and manganese first, before going through a cycle to remove PFAS, according to the Town’s DPW Director Thomas Temple.

Tom Barr, water treatment operator for the engineering company Weston and Sampson, said the PFAS removed from the wells will be brought to a facility where it will be incinerated.

'A significant follow-up expenditure'

Daniel attended a PFAS colloquium recently where town administrators from across the state spoke of solutions costing up to $15 and $20 million.

“It’s an expensive thing to fix,” he said. “We want taxpayers to be aware there will be a significant follow-up expenditure”

Barnstable PFAS contamination:Of 21 ponds tested, 21 had contaminants, town report finds

Voters also approved an article to spend $11,066.53 to pay prior year bills.

Before the Town Meeting Crayton Nickerson said voters had to pass the water capital articles. “We’ve only got one aquifer,” he said. “What gets me is all the irrigation systems going on. It (the water) all comes from the same source.”

Daniel was asked for his take on the issue. “We have a single source aquifer,” he said. Private and municipal wells draw from the same source. “Having to carve out for private wells seems self-defeating.”

Follow Denise Coffey on Twitter: @DeniseCoffeyCCT.